Telephone Code: 868
Local Emergency Phone - Ambulance: 990
Local Emergency Phone - Fire: 990
Local Emergency Phone - Police: 999
Climate: Tropical; rainy season (June to December)
Currency (Code): Trinidad and Tobago dollars (TTD)
Electricity: 115 V
Voltage: 60 Hz
Plug types(s): A, B
Major Languages: English, Trinidadian Creole English, Tobagonian Creole English, Caribbean Hindustani (a dialect of Hindi), Trinidadian Creole French, Spanish, Chinese
Major Religions: Protestant 32.1%, Roman Catholic 21.6%, Hindu 18.2%, Muslim 5%, Jehovah's Witness 1.5%
Time Difference: UTC-4 (1 hour ahead of Washington, DC, during Standard Time)
Potable Water: Opt for bottled water
International Driving Permit: Suggested; additionally, if you plan to drive in Trinidad and Tobago, you will need an Inter-American Driving Permit issued by the AAA
Road Driving Side: Left
Tourist Destinations: Port of Spain; Maracas Bay; Pigeon Point; Caroni Bird Sanctuary; Asa Wright Nature Centre & Lodge; Little Tobago Island; Mount Saint Benedict Monastery
Major Sports: Soccer, sailing, track and field, rugby
Cultural Practices: Avoid cursing or using foul language as it is considered a criminal offense.
Tipping Guidelines: In general, Trinidadians do not tip. A 10% service charge is often included at restaurants. If you really want to tip a particular waiter for exceptional service, make sure to physically give them the cash or leave it on the table where they can see it. Do not add it into the bill or credit card slip. Tipping private taxi drivers is at your discretion. Do not tip if you share a taxi. Tip a few dollars each round for the bartender.
Souvenirs: Sarongs and other hand-painted clothing; shell necklaces and beaded, gold, and silver jewelry; leather sandals, spices, woodcarvings, steel pan drums, handmade ceramic statues
Traditional Cuisine: Callaloo --- a stew with a soup-like consistency; dasheen (a type of taro) leaves are cooked with a variety of herbs and spices; crabs are traditionally added, however, chicken or salted pork may also be used

---
country: Trinidad and Tobago
date: May 03, 2023
author: CIA
source: <https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/countries/Trinidad and Tobago/travel-facts>
license: public domain (U.S.)
...
